# Buddhism.

## A Study of the Buddhist Norm.

### By Caroline Rhys Davids, M. A.

#### Lecturer in Indian Philosophy, Manchester University; Fellow of University College, London.

### 15 Bedford Street, London. 1928.

### Thornton Butterworth Limited.

---

---

# Chapter 1. --- The Pali Tradition.

The general growth of interest in Buddhism is due to more than one assignable cause. But we may class the various causes fairly enough under the growth of general knowledge. And under this fact of expanding knowledge we may distinguish between growth of intellectual curiosity and sympathy in the knower, and additional facilities in the means of knowing.

We must resist the temptation, in the limited scope at our disposal, of lingering over the former group of causes, and glance forthwith at the latter.

In the first place we are now beginning to reap the harvest sown by certain pioneers, who returned last century from countries where creed and culture are or have been Buddhist, in their hearts the wish, on their shoulders the task, to make known in the West a literature venerable in its tradition, and, where still followed, a living force in the present, but practically unknown outside Asia. This was the religious literature of Ceylon, Siam, and Burma, written on palm-leaf manuscripts, and, for the most part, in a language not at any time native to any of those countries, but hailing from the ancient dialects of North-East India. Closely akin to this language, which, as a literary diction, is known in the mediæval portion of the literature as _pāli_ (or The Text), is that of certain inscriptions carved on rock and pillar, found in different parts of India. These are known as the Edicts of the Emperor Asoka, the Indian over-lord who reigned _about_ 272-35 BCE. They consist largely of injunctions to righteous and fraternal conduct, and refer to passages contained in the most ancient of these same Pāli compositions. These oldest compilations are treasured, in the three countries above-named, as canonical scriptures. And the Pāli language is judged to be a literary version of an Indo-European or Aryan dialect, later than the language of the Vedas and Brāhmaṇas, or oldest known Brahmin texts, but earlier than what is called Sanskrit, that is, the literary language of India during nearly the whole of the Christian era.

Now this Pāli was the vehicle of what is, so far as we have yet been able to discover, the earliest formulated records of Buddhism. Dead as a vernacular, it still lives on as a literary instrument in the native colleges or monasteries of Ceylon, Siam, and Burma, just as Latin was the mediæval, and is, to some extent still, the modern vehicle for ecclesiastical Christianity. In its vernacular or spoken form, it appears to have been the language, according to Buddhist commentarial tradition, of Măg'ădhă, according to Rhys Davids, of Kōsălă, about the fifth century BCE (or earlier) and subsequent centuries. It was in the kingdom of Kosala that the Buddhist movement took firmest root, growing up in the great college at Sāvatthī, the site of which has during the last few years been excavated. So that although the first Buddhist Emperor, Asoka, was of Magadha, south of Kosala, and established his capital at Patna on the Ganges, the Buddhist canon had already been compiled (though not yet written) more or less in its present form in Kosalese, and not in Māgadhī, and so it has since then remained in the countries of Further India, after the expulsion of Buddhism from its birthplace.

Buddhism was a missionizing movement from the first, and Further India was won over to Buddhism by missions dispatched from its centres in North-East India. And it is in Further India, constantly loyal to its adopted religion, that the Pāli books, handwritten on palm-leaves, have been preserved, freshly copied, commented upon, or otherwise elaborated in other palm-leaf manuscripts, and have thence, in copies old or new, been sold or given to, or appropriated by Europeans.

Now while Prinsep on the one hand first deciphered the rock-cut inscriptions of the Emperor Asoka, containing historical evidence of inestimable value, Turnour, Childers and Gogerly, Oldenberg and Rhys Davids, for over half a century, have been educating European culture in the contents of the Pāli palm-leaf MSS. Prior to this, our knowledge of early Buddhism was derived from certain books of an early mediæval date, such as that from which the late Edwin Arnold derived his famous poem, "The Light of Asia." These books were written in the Sanskrit, which as a _general literary_ vehicle of thought (and not as merely the language of a learned class) had gradually superseded the earlier literary vehicle of Pāli. So far, no manuscripts from Northern India, or from Buddhist centres North and North-East of India, have yielded us anything, in diction or in subject-matter, so apparently near to the beginnings of Buddhism, as a religion and a body of culture, as some of these Pāli books that Ceylon, Siam and Burma have preserved. These oldest books, together with several of a somewhat later date, claim, by their own testimony, and the ancient tradition of these southern Buddhist countries, to have been collected into a Canon or Bible of sacred documents, entitled the _Three Pit′ăkăs_, or _Baskets of Tradition_. They were, and are, held "sacred" in this sense, that they are believed to contain the genuine sayings of Go′tămă, the Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, as well as other books, which are elaborations of subjects stated by him in outline; sacred also in this, that they may not be added to, nor otherwise altered.

Besides these Three Pitakas, the Pāli literature contains a great body of exegetical commentary on the Pitakas, mainly as to the oldest group of it, the work of two scholars, both Indian --- Buddhaghosa and Dhammapāla --- dating from the fifth century CE a great number of sub-commentaries added gradually from that date till the present, and, lastly a number of other treatises, some older and some more recent than the great commentaries. These are independent works, in that they are not systematic expositions of the sacred texts. But they are, again, dependent in that they express opinions in conformity with those texts, and frequently cite them as authoritative.

Now it is the editing of this palm-leaf literature in printed books, and the translating of them by the scholars I have named, aided by many others, that has been gradually, for the last half century, bringing a knowledge of early Buddhism to the educated public in Europe and America. The Pāli Text Society alone, founded by Professor Rhys Davids in 1881, has published seventy volumes of texts and translations. _The Sacred Books of the East_, founded by the late Max Müller, published several translations. _The Sacred Books of the Buddhists_ series, the Harvard _Oriental Series_, the German _Pali-Society_ are publishing more.

Recent political events in Asia have also aided in bringing Buddhism nearer to us. The annexation of Upper Burma by Great Britain in 1889 resulted in bringing a number of Government officials and European teachers to reside in, and become acquainted with, Burma and its religion and culture. French and English interference in Siam has had a somewhat similar result. And the rise of Japan, as a great power among the Great Powers, has set Europe considering the part played in that rise by the Buddhist factor in Japanese religion. Lastly, the secrets of the cult of Tibet --- a curious adulterated Buddhism --- and of its ecclesiastical libraries, seem at length to be becoming a little less inaccessible to us. More than this one cannot say, but the additional factor in the general interest in Buddhism remains.

Once more, there is the awakening to new and international activity in Buddhist countries, in connection with their own religion and culture, that must be taken into account. More than two thousand years after the period of its first missionary zeal, we hear, simultaneously from all the five countries named above, of fresh movements, not only of self-defence against the invasion of other creeds, but also of attack.

Of these movements the system of ultramontane, chiefly political propaganda, started by the Tibetan Church is well known to exist and may have important results at least in Asia, but at present of those results, or of its organization we can say nothing, and its effective influence for Europe is as yet _nil_. Elsewhere the new activity is purely religious, and consists chiefly in _1._ the printing of the canonical and other Pāli classical works in the national script; _2._ the inclusion of these and other printed books in the monastic manuscript libraries; _3._ the increase of Buddhist colleges; _4._ the establishment of foreign missions; _5._ the circulation of periodical propagandist literature in East and West; _6._ the institution of societies, chiefly in the West, for the study of Buddhism.

Whatever may be the final result of the opening up of so many avenues, political, geographical, literary and educational, the immediate consequences involve a wider acquaintance among ourselves with Buddhists and with all the varieties of their traditions and culture as Buddhists.

But that wider acquaintance will profit us little, in so far as we honestly wish to get a just idea of those traditions and an intelligent appreciation of that culture, if we rigidly estimate the one or the other by the measure of our own traditional standpoints. These standpoints have been slowly built up in the past by a certain selection among notions and beliefs. Some we threw away; some we adopted; and from time to time we made alterations or reforms. And where we altered, we found it not always possible to make our traditions of speech conform to our reforms. For instance, we have ceased to believe that the sun "rises" or "sets." We _believe_ that when each of those events happens, our portion of earth rolls sunwards, and away from the sun, respectively, in its rotation around its own axis and the sun. But the old phrases hold firm, so that we should expect to hear even our astronomers use them.

These facts, then:--- a specific tradition in knowledge, and a vehicle of expression that has not coincided in its growth with the growth of that knowledge --- should make us wary in estimating another tradition, another standpoint, other modes of expression. We may fancy that we are measuring other views by standpoints that are not only absolutely true, but the only standpoints possible or conceivable. But in fact we are measuring, by what is relatively true, by what has come to be accepted among ourselves as true, a different range of standpoints, which have come to hold good, analogously and equally, for other sections of humanity.

And it is just the otherness in standpoint, in the midst of much that is like our own, that we need to discern before we judge, and from which, in contributing unit-wise to modify the thought of our day, we have most to learn.

It is not the purpose of this little book to repeat the story of the origin and growth of Buddhism, as revealed in the life and teaching of him whom Buddhists and their books adore as its founder. This has been repeatedly told, in every language of Europe, and the telling of it adapted to all classes of readers. Most of us have read, in some form, the story of the wonderful noble of North-East India, known as Go′tămă, the Buddha, or Siddhattha, or Sākyamuni,* and of the Church or community of religious brethren, and of lay-followers founded by him, and by him taught and guided for the last forty years of his entirely devoted life. A scholar here and there has sought to explain away the legend of the Buddha's renunciation and ministry as an evolution and adaptation of that great group of fantasies entitled sun-myths. But since these explanations were attempted, the pile of historic evidence, archæological and documentary, has been ever growing, till at this time of day we may say that the life of Siddhattha Gotama of the Sākyas, as a historical fact, is at least as well demonstrated as that of the founder of any other religion of any antiquity.

*) Siddhattha (Sanskrit, Siddhartha) Gotama = personal and family names; Sākyamuni, sage or saint of the Sākyans, his clan; Buddha = Awakened, Enlightened, Wise, a title equivalent to our Messiah or Christ.

Draped and embroidered with myth and legend it is, no less than the story of every such founder's life. But a personal mission extending over years, devolving on to, and carried on by unbroken apostolic succession, till as an organized institution it was accepted for centuries as the paramount religious guide in the culture of India, is a stubborn thing to argue away. The acceptance of it as, in the main, historically true may show a less extravagant recourse to forced interpretations, and assumptions of improbable happenings, than the denial of it as such.

Be that as it may, about the existence of a tradition of culture, religious, philosophical, ethical, handed down by that apostolic succession till this day in Southern Asia with remarkable purity and consistency, there can be no reasonable question whatever. Here too, it is true, a few sceptical minds have suggested that the documents attesting this unbroken tradition of events alleged to have happened in North-East India were not originally compiled _soon after_, and _there_, as they claim to have been, but were composed much later, in the earliest home of their creed's adoption, to wit, in Ceylon. They are therefore only the pious romancing of religious writers in the Buddhist monasteries of that island, working on a basis of stored-up runes and legends.

It is true that the Pāli Canon was not committed to writing till long after it had existed as an unwritten compilation, and till nearly two hundred years after Buddhism had been introduced into Ceylon. This last-named event took place in the year 241 BCE; the writing down of the Canon began about 80 BCE. But it is well known that, in India, memory and oral tradition have ever been considered a safer method of protecting sacred doctrines from the introduction and perpetuation of errors than writing. We read, in the Pāli Canon itself, of how the Brahmins in India met, in certain towns at stated intervals, to con over their own unwritten hymns and prayers. And even the hearing of these was jealously guarded from certain castes. Even at the present day, it is we, and not the Hindus, who need the written letter of their sacred literature. And it was an innovation when the Buddhists of Ceylon, fearing lest the brutal hand of war, in a small island, might at any moment crush out the existence of these splendidly trained memories, decided to make use of the secular art of writing, wherewith to register their mental stores. And so we read in the two classic chronicles of Ceylon:---

The brethren wise of former days, they handed down by word of mouth  
The Text of the Three Pit′akas, and all the Commentary too.  
Seeing how men were perishing, the brethren then together came,  
And that the Faith might be maintained, made writing of the Law in Books.

There is no evidence in any portion of this literature either in Pitaka or Commentary, that this late recourse to writing was due to any mystery-mongering or esotericism. The Buddha, it is stated, said that his was not the hand of a teacher, closed now and again to withhold doctrines. The teaching was adapted to the listener: milk for babes, strong meat for those who were strong. But this was all.

No one then who knew anything of these "memory-libraries," as a remarkable feature of past and present Indian culture, would judge the Pāli books to be late, and quasi-spurious documents because, as _written records_, they came into being more than four centuries after their adherents claim that they were compiled. It is the fact that there is no surviving tradition of the Buddhist Churches in India taking similar steps, when their existence was threatened, that has helped to throw doubt on the authenticity of the Pāli books as genuine North-East Indian compilations, put together some in the fourth, some in the third century BCE.

The whole question of the history of Pāli-classic literature is far from being settled. But that it is a question of deep interest for philology, for the history of writing, for the history of Indian culture, for the history of religion, is coming at last to be recognized. And it is they who most deeply study the literature who tend to be convinced that, in the Canon or Three Pitakas, we have no _literary_ production composed far away, in space and time, from the centre of the movement of which it tells, but an accretion of works, compiled as the geologist would say, _in situ_, and at different dates, and at different centres, with variations, not in doctrines, but in degree of emphasis on this and that doctrine. The absence of symmetry and of system in its structure, its imperfectly coinciding repetitions, its variety of diction, all testify against its being wholly the work of a remote, late, provincial centre. The folk-lore with which it abounds is of that great stock which made its way out of North-West India into Europe. The similes with which it abounds are those of a sub-tropical continent and a great river-valley, rather than those of a tropical island. The scenes and places are North-East Indian, and may fairly be said to be described or alluded to as things seen.

The history of Pāli literature does not exhaust the question of Buddhist literature. But so far as we know, it does cover the history of the original Canon of Buddhist doctrine, considered as Canon. By Canon I mean any document or group of documents handed down, by persons acknowledged to be authoritative teachers, as containing the doctrine they teach, and, as to its contents, considered _closed_. In India itself have survived a few early works by Buddhists, written in a transitional diction between the earlier Pāli or Kosalan, and the encroaching later Sanskrit; and a few works in purer Sanskrit. 

But the great majority of Buddhist works, other than those that the Southern centres have preserved as Canonical, and have themselves added, are to be found in China, translated into Chinese. It is from re-translations of these into English, French or German --- and this is the great task before the newer generation of Buddhist scholars --- that we may expect to enrich our knowledge of classic Buddhist literature. From the Tibetan libraries too, when these become more accessible, we may yet win materials. But we may not hope to discover there, or in China, a Buddhist literary tradition handed down in unbroken continuity from the third century BCE, like that of the Pāli Canon in Ceylon.

From the following century China began to incline to the teaching of Buddhism, and from then till the seventh century we read of scholars and pilgrims going or returning to China laden with Buddhist literature. But meanwhile from the parent trunk, represented by the teaching of the Pāli Canon, there was growing out the great limb of divergent doctrines and sects known as Mahā-Yānist Buddhism. This --- the "Great Vehicle" --- first rivalled, then outgrew the mother Church, which became known among the daughters as Hīna-Yāna: Little (or Low) Vehicle. And it is these departures in Buddhism that appealed most effectively to the mission Churches in China, Korea, and Japan, and which became further differentiated --- how we do not yet know --- into the cult, so far removed from the canonical teaching, of the Lamaism of Tibet.

It can hardly be reasonably doubted, in the absence of any historical testimony, that this great and growing division in Indian Buddhism as a religious institution must have greatly aided the hostile advance of Brahminism during the early centuries of the Christian era. Buddhism started from its birth as a religious movement among the laity, as distinct from that class called Brahmins, who possessed privileges from of old, to wit, a monopoly of erudition in sacred runes, hymns, doctrine, and spells, and of the right to celebrate priestly rites. Its first converts were drawn largely from the noble or warrior class (_khattĭya_'s, Sanskrit: _kshatriya_'s). But the majority among this class were unfit to appreciate the intellectual and ethical standpoints of the new doctrine. "Whence," the Buddha is said to ask a novice who had tried his 'prentice hand at teaching a young noble, "whence should Jāyasena, born and bred in the pursuit of worldly and sensuous desires, know and see and realize that which can only be known and seen and realized by coming out of it all? 'Tis like two friends walking hand in hand into the country till, coming to a crag, one climbs up, the other stays below and calls: 'What see you up there?' And he hears: 'I see up here a lovely garden, a lovely wood, a lovely landscape, a lovely lake.' He answers: 'That's impossible.' But the other drags him up..."*

*) _Majjhima-Nikāya_, 3., 129 _f._

No creed needed so much as Buddhism to be left severely alone by political patronage, and to work out its slowly permeating and leavening effect undisturbed by ignorance in high places. But just as, in the Protestant Reformation, with the assumption by civil rulers of states of the headship over the reformed Churches, there went along with it a great advance of organization, discipline, and propaganda in the Roman Church; so in India, under Asoka, the development of the khattĭyas into the new imperialism of civil and (virtually) religious headship over India, was met by a corresponding consolidation of Brahmin tradition and influence. Gods and heavens and beliefs as to the soul and its destiny had undergone no little modification, since first their Aryan ancestors brought the Vedic hymns into India. Nevertheless the religious ritual upheld by the Brahmins met a chronic popular demand relatively ignored by Buddhism. It gave ceremonial dignity and sacramental sanction to all the vital features of physical and social life. Hardly may any religion endure as solely sufficient, that does not recognize and enhance the ordinary life of man in all its aspects.

If in the long run its political allies proved bad friends, Indian Buddhism, in the philosophical aberration of its degeneracy, went far to surrender itself into the hands of its foes. It abandoned its own original trend of philosophy, and went off to a side-track which has figured so greatly in such metaphysic as this country has produced --- the question of the reality of the external world. And thus, as Dr. Walleser has recently pointed out,* by over-emphasizing the negation of that reality, it played up to what we should now call the Absolutist position of its Vedântist opponents, namely, that the only reality behind the illusions which our senses bring us, is the soul in man and in the universe. Dr. Walleser holds that the consequent victory of Brahminism over Buddhism was thus won by intellect and logic. And he is right by the extent to which the Buddhist schools in India were unfaithful to their earlier philosophical position.

*) _Der ältere Vedânta_, Heidelberg, 1910.

To this we may return later. We need not here dwell on the story, told elsewhere, in manuals on Buddhism, of the decline and expulsion of that which once, as cult and culture, as paramount in India, gathering under its wing the learning and the science, the philosophy and the literature, the ethics and the social melioration of its age. The evidence as to episodes of persecution at the hands of certain rājas and Brahmins in the days when Buddhism was going under, is so far not firmly based. Equally scanty as yet is our knowledge of the decline and fall of the Asokan empire, of the extension of Buddhism to Kashmir under the patronage of the Scythian king, Kanishka, or of its shrinkage elsewhere in India back to its earlier centres in and around Magadha, the nucleus of Asoka's dominion. Were it not for the invaluable records left by the three famous Chinese Buddhist pilgrims who visited the chief seats of Buddhist, that is, Indian culture --- Fa-Hien in CE 400, Sung Yun in CE 518, and Yuan-Chwang in CE 629-648 --- the darkness would be yet greater than it is. When the Buddhist and Jain literature of this period --- _i. e._, of the centuries just before, and the first four after the beginning, of our era --- shall have emerged from their chrysalis-state of manuscript; when archæological research shall be carried on in a way befitting our rule in India, we may at length be able to construct something like a continuous history.

If I have alluded, even in the barest outline, to the historical fact of the waning of Buddhist paramountcy in India, it was in order the better to limit and simplify the scope of our inquiries in the following pages. The reader should never forget that to treat of "Buddhism" is just as complex and many-sided as to treat of "Christism," or, as we have selected to say, of "Christianity." The latter subject admits of very different treatment according to the aspect selected, the period of time, the centre of development, and so on. To the best of my belief, no European writer has ever been called upon to deal, even in outline, with the whole subject of Christianity or Christendom in a book of this compass. It is equally impracticable to do so in the case of Buddhism. By the foregoing the reader will see that, under that title, a book might be written with equal pertinence either on the story of the inception of the Buddhist movements and its legends, on the Buddhism of the Pāli Canon, on the history of that Canon, on the Mahā-Yānist evolution, on schools of Buddhist philosophy, on Buddhist India, on Trans-Indian Buddhism, and so forth.

It is true that these subjects are not mutually independent. As with Christianity so here, but one Founder is acknowledged, and but one and the same cradle land. And that which we have seen called the Lower Vehicle, but which should, with greater historical propriety, be called by its more ancient name of the Theravāda, or School of the Elders or Apostles, is by all admitted to be the parent stem. No Mahā-Yānist, however, and no Lamaist would concede that any treatment entitled "Buddhism" was adequate, that did not show the history of the doctrine as a progressive inspiration, and their own cult as the expanded and perfect flower of the parent gospel.

And more: the range of the subject of Buddhism is not to be confined to the cult and its adherents. India could not for a time have so far adopted that cult that we may speak of Buddhist India, and of Buddhist thought and culture, as temporarily Indian thought and culture, without being indelibly modified by it. The influence of Buddhist religion and philosophy on the post-Buddhistic Indian literature is well marked. In the words of St. Paul (1 Cor. 13., 11) when the Indian was a child, he understood as a child, he reasoned as a child. But when, under the influence of Buddhism, he became for a while a man, he put away youthful things, at least to this extent, that the graver and more virile concepts of Theravāda Buddhism may be heard reverberating through the later devotional and philosophical literature of India, even of schools opposed to Buddhism. Very forcibly was it said by the late Edmund Hardy: "Buddhism, wasted away after rival sects had appropriated everything from it that they could make any use of." (_Indische Religionsgeschichte_, 101.)

It will now be seen that some selection in this vast subject is necessary, if the slender bulk of this volume is to contain anything less superficial than a general outline of the whole. And in selecting, for this reason, and in choosing, as I have done, to present some considerations on the philosophical concepts contained in the Pāli Canon and subsequently developed, it is chiefly for these reasons:--- Based on that Canon, a philosophical tradition has been, in the Buddhist countries of Southern Asia, evolved and has survived, as a living vehicle of culture, to the present day. Even then, if we find no complete and finished "system" of philosophy in those old books of the Theravāda, we should find what is of greater interest than any such system. We should find either the more tentative output of _original_ fetches of the mind, or, at least, the adopted concepts of still older strata of thought. It is not the pioneers of intellectual expansion who give us systems, but they whose fate it was to be, as the Greeks said, After-born (_epigonoi_). But in either case, in the history of human ideas, it cannot be anything but deeply interesting to consider those ideas which have served as the roots of a living philosophical tradition over 2,000 years old. Our own is of about the same age, for did we not inherit it and assimilate it from Greek sources? In and through that tradition we have learnt to regard life and the world and our fellow-creatures and the human mind. But are there other fundamental standpoints from which we might have come to regard them?

We are apt to think there are not. We judge that, because the bed-rock of man's animal life is the same in every one:--- life, death, sex, the passions --- he will not vary in his fundamental beliefs and judgments. But these, in so far as they are _reasoned_, represent the accumulated heritage, bequeathed to the whole world, _or_ a section of it, by its most gifted minds --- the minds of the creators of points of view, and of their "after-born" --- and accepted. Now it may happen that one section of humanity may _not_ have accepted some such fresh point of view. Some other new synthesis may have extruded it, or the section was not ripe for it. The new view of things may have been, in the judgment of another section of humanity, or of the same section, elsewhere in time, sounder, truer, than its then successful rivals. But the "conjuncture," as the Germans say, passed by. The point of view, if it had been accepted, or if it had been put forward elsewhere among mankind, might have modified the whole trend of any one tradition of thought to an indefinite degree.

What actually has happened is that, in the first place, the general view of things underlying this and that group of human beliefs has not developed along one and the same line. The differences may be not so much in the notions conceived, as in the emphasis or proportion of weight attached to them. This difference becomes a very telling factor in the religious or philosophical superstructure. Secondly, these underlying notions themselves are not the same everywhere and at all times.

Now that the Pāli Pitakas --- let alone the tradition _directly_ inherited from them --- can claim to show any originality in philosophical departure, that they can, on any ground, claim to occupy a place in the general history of philosophy, save at best as a degenerate offshoot of earlier syntheses --- this is not yet allowed. "The more we advance in Central Asiatic research," wrote the late Professor R. Pischel, "the clearer it appears that, for a great portion of the Orient, Buddhism was not less a vehicle of culture than Christianity has been for the Occident. While Buddhism, he goes on to say, "as a religion gains (by that research) ever in value, as a philosophy it sinks ever deeper. With Garbe and Jacobi I am convinced that Buddha as a philosopher is entirely dependent on Kapila and Patañjali." That is to say, such philosophical concepts as we may meet with in the Buddhist doctrines of the Pāli Canon --- for Pischel admits that these are the oldest, if only "the canon of one Buddhist sect," and uses them as his authorities --- are derived from works attributed to two philosophers so named. The works in question are the Sānkhya Aphorisms and the Yogasūtra --- also a collection of aphorisms. Of the two thinkers, Kapila and Patañjali, as historical characters, there is no sound surviving evidence, and the works in question appear enshrined in commentaries, the earliest of which are a good deal subsequent to the Christian era. But tradition ascribes to the original utterances considerably greater antiquity. (See note, p. 250.)

Let this suffice by way of introduction. My aim here is not to controvert, but only to expound a few salient philosophical standpoints, which, whether they be derived or original, are involved in the ethical views and methods advocated in the Pāli Canon.

# Chapter 2. --- Dhamma and Abhidhamma.

When a Burmese, Singhalese or Siamese scholar, in matters religious and philosophical, discourses or writes, not in order to exhort or edify, but to analyze, define, classify and explain, he is said to be talking or writing not Dhamma, but Abhidhamma.

Now Dhamma, more familiar perhaps to us in its Vedic and Sanskrit form, _Dharma_, is an ancient Indian word, with the very wide meaning of Right, Good, Justice, Moral Law. The notion even came to be personified as a god among the gods. Etymologically, the word is of identical origin with our "form," the common Aryan root, according to Dr. Skeat, being 'dhar.' And 'dhar,' to quote further, means to support, sustain, maintain, hold, keep. We might therefore identify Dhamma with "good form," did this expression apply to higher matters than propriety or good taste. As signifying then "good form," raised, as mathematicians say, to a higher power, Dhamma implies that view or procedure which is, as we say, according to conscience, and constituting a more or less recognized standard, guiding rule, or norm. It is also translated by Paliyists as The Ideal, Truth, Law, Right, System or Doctrine, according to the context. Every religious or ethical teacher of ancient India had some "Dhamma" to propound. "What, sir," --- some teacher is now and again recorded as asking the Buddha --- "is your Dhamma by which you so train your disciples, that they, having found consolation, recognize it as their ultimate support and fundamental principle of religious life?"

"Fundamental" is, by the commentator on this particular passage, paraphrased by ancient or pristine. And indeed this is never lost sight of in the Pāli books:--- that the Buddha is expressing not only his own convictions, the fruit of intense effort and self-communing, but also something that was, and had in the infinite past been, and would ever be, objectively and constantly valid and true for any and every human society, nay, something that was cosmic law, eternal, necessary, omnipresent, whether discerned or not. And the function and hall-mark of a Buddha was not to devise, or create a new Dhamma, but to rediscover, recreate and revive that ancient norm. His it was to bring about its renascence as a cult in the lives, and apply it to the special needs, of his own age and its posterity. This, in words ascribed to him, is how the Buddha viewed his mission:--- "As a man, brethren, wandering in the forest, in the mountain jungle, might see an ancient path, an ancient road, trodden by men of an earlier age; and following it, might discover an ancient township, an ancient palace, the habitation of men of an earlier age, surrounded by park and grove and lotus-pool and walls, a delightful spot; and that man were to go back, and announce to the king or his minister: Behold, sir, and learn what I have seen! And, having told him, he were to invite the king to rebuild that city, and that city were to become anon flourishing and populous and wealthy once more:--- Even so, brethren, have I seen an ancient Path, an ancient Road, trodden by Buddhas of a bygone age... the which having followed, I understand life, and its coming to be and its passing away. And thus understanding, I have declared the same to the fraternity and to the laity, so that the holy life flourishes and is spread abroad once more, well propagated among men."*

*) _Sutta-Pit′aka, Samyutta-Nikāya_, "The City."

And thus of course says every great reformer: "In the beginning was the Word"... "The words that I speak are not mine." Confucius too follows the Christ and the Buddha:--- "My work is to indicate rather than to originate."

Dhamma, then, is of the common ancient Indian stock of ideas, peculiar as a term to no creed, and only immensely heightened and deepened by the Buddhists. For to them, as meaning the normal, necessary and eternal order and law of all moral or spiritual things, it stood _in place of a theodicy_, or cosmos created and carried on by a first and a final cause. Never for them a deity, it was the Necessity behind the god, to which Æschylus, at more or less the same epoch, was pointing in his "Prometheus." As gravitation exists, whether Newtons arise to discern its action or not, so for Buddhists does Dhamma exist and act, whether the current age bring forth a Buddha or not.

Let us leave the matter for the moment at that. I may seem to be loading the word with a heavier import than is given to it by Pāli scholars, for instance, than that given by Rhys Davids in _Buddhist India_ (p. 292), where he likens it to that "good form," which a man of right feeling will judge he should at any moment conform to. But I am not proposing to supersede this purely ethical aspect of Dhamma at all. In the passage referred to, the writer is discussing the use of Dhamma in the Asokan Edicts, and "the way in which it came to be used as it was in India, in Asoka's time." This, he writes, is not "Law," which is frequently used for Dhamma. Here I am not concerned so much with the ethical aspect, as with that background of philosophical postulates which, uttered or unexpressed, lies at the back of our most solemn judgments about life and the whole of things. And just as our use of "law" may vary, from mere by-law to a natural sequence of the universe, so did the Buddhist Indian "in the street," for whom the Edicts were intended, and Buddhaghosa the scholar, differ in the significance which Dhamma could bear for them.

Dhamma, Tao, Anangkē (necessity), Agathon (Plato's "Good"):--- these all, with various shades of meaning and emphasis, represent as many utmost fetches of the early human intellect to conceive an impersonal principle, or order of things prior to, and more constant than, the administrative deity representing it. To ask of the systems developing severally those four notions:--- If there, who put it there?" --- is to invert their point of view. It is contrary to Buddhism to see in Dhamma the expression of a prior Consciousness. Buddhism is content to trace in human consciousness the evolution of cosmic norm or Dhamma. Herein we have come on to a fundamental concept in Buddhist philosophy.

...
